Let's look at NFS now.
Unlike the block devices we have seen so far,
NFS does not store data in blocks.
Instead, it saves data in the form of files.
NFS works on a server-client model.
To illustrate this, let's take the example
of a software repository server.
the directory /software/repos exists
on the repository server.
This directory is then shared over the network
using an NFS to the clients which,
in this case, are employee laptops.
The data you see on your laptop may not
physically reside on any of the attached disks.
However, once mounted,
it can be used as any other file system
in the operating system.
The term for directory sharing
in NFS is called exporting.
We will not get into the NFL server
and client configuration in detail.
Still, it is important to understand
how it works.
The NFS server maintains an export
configuration file at /etc/exports
that define the clients which should be able
to access the directories on the server.
Assume that the clients have
a network IP of 10.61.35.201,
10.61.35.202
and 10.61.35.203,
and the NFS server has an IP of 10.61.112.101.
The most straightforward
export configuration
on the NFS servers configuration
looks like this.
This is followed by the hostnames
of all the clients.
The hostnames can be replaced
by IP or a network range
or can also use a wildcard asterisk
should you want no limitations to the clients
that can see this network file share.
In an ideal situation,
there would be a network firewall
between the NFS server and the clients.
As a result, specific ports may
have to be opened
between the server and the clients
for the NFS solution to work.
Once the /etc/exports file has
been updated on the server,
the directory is shared to the clients
by using the export-fs command.
Exportfs-a command
exports all the mounts defined
in the /etc/exports file.
Exportfs-0 allows us
to manually export a directory.
Once exported, you should be able
to mount it on a local directory
such as /mnt/software/repos using
the mount command on the client side.
Make a note of the source file system used
in the mount command.
It is the IP or a hostname of the NFS server
followed by the directory on the server
that we exported separated by a colon.
The network share should now
be mounted on the clients.
There are several other options available
with the exportfs command.
However, this should be sufficient
to get you started with NFS.
Let's head over to the labs and practice
working with an NFS.